---
layout: default
title: Introducing...
permalink: introducing-
---
<!-- Add an essay or interpretive material below this line,
using HTML or markdown.  Do not modify this file above this line -->
“The last poem I’ll read this evening is a group. The group is called “The Speed of Darkness,” Muriel Rukeyser prefaces during the fortieth-minute of her 1969 speech at Sir George Williams University (SGWU, now Concordia University), “they’re short poems, and I’ll just pause between poems. There should be numbers going up in back of me; one, two, three. I’ll just pause” (Rukeyser “Muriel Rukeyser at SGWU, 1969,” added emphasis). Rukeyser, here, details the structure of the title poem of her most recently published book at the time, The Speed of Darkness. In what she calls a group—or, later in 1972, a “series” (according to Mitts (2015))—her “Speed of Darkness” poem includes thirteen separate poetic occurrences which bring her book to an end. They are “arranged paratactically so that each is independent of the other but brough into relation with the other through juxtaposition” (Mitts 2015). In this sense, “The Speed of Darkness” contributes a variety of poetic occurrences which are separated by spaces yet function as a whole.

The unique nature of this set of occurrences is highlighted most evidently in Rukeyser’s oral presentation of the poem at SGWU. While she prefaces the poem with the fact that there are “numbers going up in back of [her],” the audio material clearly excludes this visual aid which is offered in-person. For example, between minute 40:49 and 40:53, there are four sections of silence—of space—which separate the first poetic occurrence from the second; “resurrection music, silence, and surf” and “no longer speaking” (Rukeyser The Speed of Darkness p#?). The space that connects these two occurrences, while planned, takes an awry presence. It’s forced and unnatural, which contributes significantly to the meaning that is communicated throughout the poem. These moments in the audio recording reaffirm a quality that Rukeyser has found in her own work: “doubleness” (Gander 296)—or what I am using as “duality” in this project—which is a form of contrast that exists within poetics. She states that there are “two kinds of poems: the poems of unverifiable facts…; and the other kind being the document, the poem that rests on material evidence” (Rukeyser “The Education of a Poet” 226)—and her poems encompass both. These felt, experienced dualistic spaces that are engaged in the audio recording will be the subjects of analysis for this project.

When individual listeners engage in this auditory experience, they involve “the practice of attending to audible words or sounds in order to make meaning of them” (Ceraso 102). This is what Steph Ceraso calls multimodal listening; a term which “encompasses both the semiotic and the bodied, sensory aspects of multimodal experiences” which are “significantly interconnected” (104). Thus, beyond reading these spaces in a physical copy of The Speed of Darkness, listeners embrace a sonic experience of space which develops a new “reading” of each poetic occurrence. In other words, the duality of audible spaces which any listener comes to embody is a practice of meaning making. For instance, this is represented in the above example that highlights the space between section one and two of Rukeyser’s work. The four seconds of silence after the word “surf” develops a new meaning to the next stanza: “no longer speaking / listening with the whole body / and with every drop of blood / overtaken by silence” (Rukeyser The Speed of Darkness p#?). This space is significant in that it balances a subjective-objective duality to generate meaning within “unverifiable facts” and “material evidence.”

Therefore, this project argues that the embodiment of audible spaces in “The Speed of Darkness” develop meaning through a duality which exceeds linguistic boundaries. When any body engages the auditory dimensions of these spaces, they develop significance beyond the ability of language. The subject-object duality, then, functions to enforce this practice as Rukeyser attempts to connect both within her poem. To develop my claim, this project will first turn to a variety of scholarship that span rhetoric, sound studies, poetics, philosophy, and feminist studies. I discuss, here, how multimodality, (trans)corporeality, symbolism, and ecopoetics have produced a foundation for the work being done in this project. Next, I turn to solidify my argument through the annotation of audible spaces in “The Speed of Darkness.” This will involve an explicit turn to how software—such as AudiAnnotate—allows for meaning to be discovered and disseminated. Lastly, in a short conclusion, I call for future theoretical work to open and be investigated according to what has been discussed. 
