---
layout: default
title: Part 1: Embodying Duality and Making Meaning
permalink: part-1-embodying-duality-and-making-meaning
---
<!-- Add an essay or interpretive material below this line,
using HTML or markdown.  Do not modify this file above this line -->
# Part 1: Embodying Duality and Making Meaning

To begin, again, with the words of Muriel Rukeyser herself on the duality of her work: there are “two kinds of poems: the poems of unverifiable facts, based in dreams, in sex, in everything that can be given to other people only through the skill and strength by which it is given; and the other kind being the document, the poem that rests on material evidence” (Rukeyser “The Education of a Poet” 226). As Rukeyser understands her work to exist at the convergence of these “kinds of poems,” they come to balance the subjective and objective tensions which encompass poetics. And, while this is present in her words, it is also powerfully situated in the absence of language—in the silence of spaces. Take, for instance, figure 1; here, the fifth poetic occurrence of “The Speed of Darkness” is illustrated as it is in text, and this is located at minute 42:34 in the audio recording. Even the spaces within the occurrences take on a new meaning when read visually and then heard audibly. Her exaggeration of syllables and length of pauses such as between “between” and “between” allow for what is literal material evidence to forge unverifiable meaning that is interpreted by the listener. 

As this interpretation unfolds, the listener involves a practice of multimodal listening that produces meaning within such subjective-objective spaces. Integral to the work with spaces in Muriel Rukeyser’s poem, “The Speed of Darkness,” is the embodiment of sound via multimodal listening. This form of embodiment functions beyond “listening practices that depend on the ears exclusively” where “listeners’ primary goal is to hear and interpret audible sound” (Ceraso 105); the embodiment of dualistic spaces involves a holistic practice of listening which encompasses multiple senses. When one listens to the spaces in Rukeyser’s work, they are forced to listen with their entire body—as opposed to reading these spaces in (a) text. Spaces come to matter and, thus, mean, through the embodiment of beyond-the-linguistic duality that exists between and within poetic occurrences. In this sense, “spaces between words do not expose metaphysical breaks, but the constitutive limits of language” which barricade meaning (Hill 285). The ability for meaning to be made beyond linguistic function is a result of the subjective-objective, dualistic embodiment in Rukeyser’s audible reading. 

Thus, central to the production of meaning in “The Speed of Darkness” is (1) dualistic subjective-objective characteristics and (2) embodiment of audible spaces, which both exist beyond the limits of language. Mitts similarly asserts that “the silence between [the stanzas] is the kinesthetic background, the emergent signification which speaks through relation, or even lack of relation, between the words at either end of the space” (2015). When listening to the audio, it becomes clear that the silence in such spaces becomes significant due to its beyond-linguistic capabilities. In another instance, at minute 43:40 in the audio, there is a space between the seventh and eighth poetic occurrence that is ‘interrupted’ by the cough of an audience member. While this isn’t directly associated with the poem itself, it is a facet of the “environmental aspects” (Ceraso 105) that emerges signification. In other words, the audible space takes on a different meaning when its beyond-linguistic potentiality is affected during the recording. This is not only because the spaces becomes when interrupted but, also, its significance is emphasized in that process.
